really like my survival depends on my
community and people showing up and
there's a messiness to it I feel like
both people around me are hornier but
also with me you know like there's some
like it's almost this image of like the
why not now just kind of infects people
[Music]
hello and welcome to the art of
accomplishment where we explore living
the life you want with enjoyment and
ease I'm Tara Howley and today I'm
speaking with Michael Nagel Michael is a
beloved and longtime member of the AOA
Community a little over a year ago he
was diagnosed with colon cancer which
completely unraveled the life he' been
previously living where he was working
in alternative education and sematic
healing practice
practices he's been incredibly
introspective and real about his journey
with cancer and we sat down to talk
about what he's learned so far hi
Michael hi thanks so much for being here
today with us yeah very happy too I'm so
excited to see you yeah that's very nice
yeah so I'm gonna start with the
question sure so you're not dead yet I'm
Not Dead Yet you're not dead yet though
you might be soon yes yep what's it like
to want to live because you really want
to live I do
and God I mean there's there's so much
to share I've had a cancer diagnosis now
14 months um so since October
2023 total shock total Blindside just
I've never been sick in my life so it's
a totally strange experience I've always
been healthy and able to do things
things and you know minor muscular
skeletal issues and things like that but
nothing nothing
serious
um I've been
doing we could call it three quarters
conventional treatment one quarter
alternative
treatment um you know so I've done
chemotherapy and radiation and
surgery and yeah has helped a lot with
my quality of
life
and currently we're just maintaining the
cancer state in my body so
currently I do chemotherapy it's every
two weeks it takes about 50 hours or so
it's long it's long so there's a part in
a hospital and then a part comes home
with me so if we start Wednesday morning
it goes till about Friday Friday
afternoon it's about 2 and a half days
takes me a day or two to recover from
that and then I kind of have nine 10
solid days with some luck and each two
weeks has that of going from chemo and
symptom management to okay I'm getting
back to steady
ground and lately it almost feels like a
race like okay I've got eight nine good
days what are we doing with them
yeah as long as I keep doing
conventional treatment which is a huge
question for me if I with it or
not it's kind of like you know I'm told
that my cancer is stable and for modern
oncology that's a good result for my
cancer and for me it's incredibly
unsatisfying you know it's it's not what
I want I
want I I feel up for the challenge if I
knew okay we're going to get through you
know we're going to have a cancer-free
body in a couple months or a year okay a
really challenging
experience to hold things stable what I
realized was like wow I have to
pay three days of pretty intense illness
to get 11 yeah that's the equation in my
life right now a steep price Deep it's
Steep and it can I ask you a question
what what makes it worth
it yeah
it's the the truly honest anwers I'm not
sure I'm not sure if the exchange is
worth it
I'm it's such an intense exchange rate
yeah very expensive but I've seen it in
this process of oh I don't like what's
happening to me this feels like such a
waste of a human life and that feeling
is somehow it's tied into the well I'm
not dead yet yeah okay what would I like
to do with this time yeah
and yeah there's a couple of feelings I
mean one
is for better and for worse it heightens
almost all of my
interactions it I've been really really
interested in
um I call it the Psychedelic of
mortality like what it does to people to
be near me like the contact eye what it
does me what it does to my relationships
and what what is it like what does it do
most of my interactions feel heightened
you know maybe all you know and there is
that
like like um
it gets harder to leave things
unsaid when there's this like H is there
a
later my assessment or my knowing of you
is you you offer that level of support
to your community always you were the
you were the rock you were the support
system and so what's it like to be on
the other side yeah receiving the first
thing out of my mouth is I hate it
I don't hold that in that's the first
thing more here what makes you hate it
because you can give it I've seen you
give it time and time again yeah it's
funny I I could see myself about to hold
that sentence in I was like let's just
say it and see
what that's vulnerable as [__] God
yeah to
not not believe that I'm self-sufficient
and not believe
that you know I've really up until this
point I've really constructed my adult
life to have a lot of autonomy and a lot
of Here's My
Sanctuary this is my space I really care
about that if I'm inviting you in it's
very conscious on my
part
and there's kind of some switch for me
of like oh if I'm inviting you into my
world I'm trying to do it the
aspirations with total
acceptance but the the flip side to that
is like you know very very picky very
very selective and you know I totally
fully 100% get I hate it I get it I can
imagine many of us would feel the same
way in the in your shoes but if you
couldn't feel that if you couldn't have
that reaction what would you what would
you feel or notice I've never done a
trust fall per se but that's the image
that's coming to mind like it just feels
like this
infinite like trusting that I'm G to be
caught I'm gonna be cared for I
sometimes talk about this experience as
both deeply unlucky and deeply lucky
yeah
you know cancer like flash freezes your
life like whatever setup you have that's
what you're going to work
with if you had aspirations you know I
don't think this is like 100% true but
the people you're close to are the
people you've got that's youve got to go
through with this and so I don't have a
partner
but I've had someone with
me basically the whole 14 months people
have made a calendar and rotate it in
and rotate it out and come up with
systems and so I had an infusion just
this past Wednesday to Friday friend was
scheduled to
come he got sick he didn't
come my friend will kind of manages my
care put out a call and I mean I don't
know how long it took 48 Hours someone
had bought a plane ticket and they're
like oh I can come for the week and
that
feeling like of being caught or
held it's
powerful it's
unfamiliar it feels a bit like
strange I do feel a bit young in it like
I do feel a bit
like I'm the toddler in the play pen and
I'm just kind of like ah what's going on
what who's here someone else is here you
know just kind of having my big
experience and then something's
happening around me to protect me you
know it feels like I feel very protected
right now it's really an amazing
dichotomy to be on an edge right where
you don't know what what life's going to
be like in six months or one month or a
year and to feel protected and
perpetually held in that trust fall it's
a mind [__]
[Music]
[Laughter]
so weird it's weird
it's it's this like
strange staring into the
unknown feeling well
protected
knowing you know of course I know a lot
of people now who have cancer it's new
me that community
and the support systems tend to be
partners that tends the support system
yeah and so I know folks who are single
going through this and they don't have
this rotating cast of loving characters
who will you know come and you know I'm
trying this alternative thing so you
have to cook this really specific way
people just they sure I don't even cook
meat at home you want to eat sure okay
we'll figure it out sure
whatever so fascinating so the mind is
like okay this is a mind [__] and the
Heart how does the
heart hold those two if at all grief and
gratitude those are the two big
ones yeah the grief is an interesting
one because it comes up in all these
different
nuances grief for my own
life there there can be a heart pull
when someone leaves of like am I going
to see them
again and you know that that can pull I
feel yeah I think protected is a good
word very protected by my community
very somehow a community has appeared
and just sort of decided you know to the
extent that another human can help me
with this experience that will
happen and you know this is one of the
is I think about the work of that
weird it feels like a paradox to me if
no one can do the work for
you but having support makes it a lot
less
harsh there is a commitment in this
community to make sure I never go to
chemo
alone you know we were we were talking a
little bit
about the
denial like I still I still hope I'm
going to wake up and realiz that like I
don't have cancer or that this was all
just some confusion or maybe the doctors
are making too big a deal out of this
and you know it's not really lethal and
which is amazing given that you've been
going through this for four I mean the
power of the mind right it's amazing 14
months chemo every two weeks it's
amazing how much the
Mind bucks against this and almost the
shock of like
it feels like that should be a
Birthright it feels like that should
just be you're human of course you never
go through an experience like the fire
yourself and we said mind denial heart
grief and gratitude and you're because
you're dealing with colon cancer what's
Your Gut how's your gut feel about
holding this I don't know if it's hard
or gut but let's go with
gut it's like under the
denial and under the
the kind of slamming back and forth from
grief
gratitude I would say the gut is
probably where the Curiosity about this
is
living the like this is what's happening
to
me and it's
like yeah like actually being able to
turn into it being like this is my
reality
as much as I want
to not believe it like under all of the
turmoil there is a like so this is
what's happening ah
okay does that mean that I don't get to
live a meaningful or joyful life I don't
know
actually yeah what what does it mean
from the gut right asking the gut like
what does it mean you know I I've I've
gone back and forth but I tend to lean
towards there's some kind of animating
Force Spirit Divine
force
and I think from the from the gut point
of
view it's like so what if this isn't
just a mistake what if this isn't just
tragic and it's I've had to
learn if
if I skip the denial and the Heartbreak
that feels terrible to me yeah yeah yeah
of course course and it's it's the most
obvious thing and yet I've really had to
come
into I can't go to the spiritual without
watching my mind just be like I hate
this situation and watching my heart
being like I don't want to say goodbye
to people this is terrible what
yeah and then under that there can be a
bit of a like so this is what's
happening yeah and the aspiration to
still have a rich beautiful life is
still there yeah huh this is never the
script I would have written for myself
here we
are what do we what do we do with that
yeah what do you do with that and I
don't want to bypass the denial I'm also
in denial like no [__] this terrible
idea and grieving like oh my God
heartbreaking yeah and so not bypassing
those so what what is there there's a
couple things that are alive there and
like what if this isn't a mistake you
know what if this isn't wrong what if
this isn't just tragic yeah if it isn't
a mistake what is it oh I love being
able to write I love being able to speak
into this experience that feels really
like that feels worth it that feels
worth it
I get curious about just how far does
Mind Body Energy healing go yeah and
there isn't a movement in me that's like
why not push it can it interact with my
cellular dysfunction I have no clue but
I believe in that I believe in it I
believe that there's some way that the
body holds emotion as
energy and there is something where it
feels like Health you know when we
release and we move it feels like Health
it's an undeniable feeling I think of so
much you know so many kinds of work of
just we move something and we feel
healthier we feel more resilient we feel
more present yeah and call it emotion
call it energy call it trauma healing
you know there's some
signature that just I I can't deny that
feels like Health to me and so there's
something in me of like
okay I want to spend time with the
people I love I want to Rite and I want
to go as far as I can in the mind body
healing path and just see what happens
and there's some just
like if not now I don't have a later
anymore it's really intense to not have
a later but it also it's it's
confronting in a helpful way if I
believe in it now's the moment that was
the moment fascinating right there's no
tomorrow like okay I'll do it next year
I don't know how
long my body can hold
out and I don't know how long I'm going
to be up for this three days for 11 days
trade or now I keep doing
it and it's not even that trade isn't
even a long-term
promise that trade the expect is at some
point that will no longer be available
to me right and so for now you know in
this minute I think well I'll keep
taking the trade not knowing if it's
couple months six months a
year I Leave Myself the door every chemo
to be like if you want to be done with
this you're welcome to be done like and
that feels really
really I think so much about the um
there's a heuristic that I learned from
AOA like the way I I remember it is like
if you're worried that you might have
conflict where it could rupture the
relationship like a breakup you know it
can be really helpful to grieve that
breakup first and then you can actually
be yourself and be like hey here's my
limit here's my
boundary and I'm no longer contorting
from that
possibility and I found an analogy of
that for me in mortality of like oh if
I'm not
open to the fact that this is the end of
my life I can't choose chemo I'm just
kind of I'm just like like you know
don't want to die don't want to die they
say they're gonna keep me alive blinders
are
on versus the
like I'm actually at choice that choice
might be the end of my
life but there is a choice it's not
actually being forced into it it's so
easy to project cap onto my oncologist
it's so easy to make
projection but he's not actually my cap
or anything like that this is him you
know basically saying I wish I had
better for you this is what I have would
you do you want to take the three days
for 11 days trade that I can help you
with it's gonna be we can do that
together and yeah there's this like oh
if I'm not
open to this being the end of my life I
can't choose right you know I'm just I'm
just like a scar I'm so scared that I'm
just like have to have to do chemo what
I'm hearing is that knowing that you're
accepting the end of your life is
actually empowering you to know you can
say yes or no so you really know where
your no is and what your yes is it just
it feels
like like the will to live is at least
in me it's
strong I've wondered a lot about what's
the functional side of the denial you
know you know writing is an easy example
art
making it takes time it takes effort you
want to revise things you want to work
on it and if I'm really in the short
short short term I don't know how that
would go and I have to believe okay I've
got some time I don't have to drop
everything and write everything out
that's inside of me right this minute we
can work day by day and I sort of see
denial as like oh right you know if one
wants to build a creative life an
intimate life a professional life it's
really useful to not be in life or death
every minute function it protective you
talked about the community being
protective but it sounds like denial has
a protective quality too I think so I've
been really interested in
like what's the positive yeah of denying
death yeah and what's the dysfunction
and denying it's hard to be at Choice
with Cho it's very
hard but if I don't buy the story that
cancer means joy and meaning are
impossible it's a really easy story to
buy really really
easy but if I don't buy that story I
think being at choice in chemo is
integral to the like wow I I am choosing
to poison myself I'm choosing to do it
so it's very different but you know what
it reminds me of when I was in I did a
natural child birth with our first child
daughter and my I was had so different
death birth but um she was turned the
wrong way so we were spine on spine so I
had back labor for like 42 hours and I
we're were doing a home birth and I was
just like [__] this this sucks this is
awful like this sucks which I can
imagine is what happens to you every
eight days when you go into the cycle
and my Midwife was like uhuh Tara she
was from the Bronx she was like uh-uh
none of that she's like yes you say yes
I want this I choose this I pick this
you say yes baby we got this I was like
[__] that I was like crawling up the
walls I was like I don't want this like
trying to resisting the pain running
away from it and then and I had 42 hours
to adjust and you have birth hormones
and things like that so you have a
little help thank golly yeah but and and
I had her like a drill sergeant over my
head and she kept making me say I want
this I choose this and it was like my
mind was like I don't want this I'm
going to just say it cuz she's going to
hit
me but by the end it was like I was
turning right to it and it was like yes
I want this I choose this come on baby
we got this thank you body and I was so
grateful for the pain and the more I
said yes to it
actually the easier it became and it's
different because I wasn't being infused
with chemo drugs like you right this is
I had all sorts of body drugs but really
changed saying yes really changes the
experience yeah and it I I think what
one of the things I've learned is like
at the beginning of
diagnosis if someone had try to say you
know I don't know Spirit has a way of
working I would have just been like a
[__] off oh no people said it to you and
you said [__]
off don't give me that [__] horrible
yeah
and I I think now what I believe
is if I can
be if I can make room for brain is in
complete denial heart is breaking in all
kinds of ways then there might actually
be a genuine yes available maybe can I
can I actually ask something because you
said brain is like no denial and heart
grieving can you hang out with those two
because you said then there might be a
yes
and can you just hang out with the
denial and The Grieving right that
freaking
heartbreak and when you're with both
what what if at all is the
yes it's
[Music]
um I just love being alive it's that
fundamental it's so interesting it's so
fun it's
so
um you know at some point I even
realized I was
like oh struggle is fun
oh what joy to resist and what is chemo
from there what does it look like I get
to struggle I get to do this weird thing
poison my body
it's it's two things
it's one is it is
this pass
of yeah I hate the three days for 11
days deal can I ask you a totally
leading
question and and I'm coming from my
experience with childbirth which is I
want to acknowledge totally different
than chemo and I had hormones helping me
but if like if I were to play my Midwife
with you uhuh no NOS no I hate you say
[__] I love this [__] chemo give
it to me
[Laughter]
hard Cheo was such an insane thing to
say yes
to why wouldn't I say yes to anything
else in my life like nothing is as
extreme that I have
found and so there's a like oh if I'm
gonna say yes to
chemo what what would I be a no to then
ever ever because and I mean that both
from the health point of view but also
not you know like I use that argument a
lot
where oncologists medical
oncologists they're very conservative
they have their reasons yeah you know if
I bring up like hey I want to fast for
five days they'll be like Oh I'm not
sure about that I want be like you you
prescribed me
[Laughter]
poison room quietly and not eat that's
really not a big deal to being actively
poisoned for three days really not a big
deal there is a spark of life in there
there is a
like yeah I want to I want to see this
out it's it's so fun even the parts that
I hate about living yeah it's a pleasure
to get to struggle and get to resist and
get to be confused it's great actually
it's fantastic not actually a problem so
wild I feel much much Messier as a
person interpersonally than I ever have
yeah there's a way that I constructed my
life to be you know I'm an energetically
sensitive person so I need a lot of
alone time and there's truth to that
that is there's I still have that
preference
and there's a messiness to like I am an
interdependent human right now 100% I
really like my survival depends on my
community and people showing up and
there's a messiness to it with some
people I've hit triggers that I never
would have expected you know never had
any idea was in me or in someone else I
feel
like both people around me are hornier
but also with me you know like there's
some like it's almost this image of like
the why not now just kind of infects
people you know I've seen people's
relationships change in substantial ways
after spending time with me something
about hanging out in the space of like
oh what if there's not a later Cascades
to a you know oh my goodness there's a
thing I need or my partner needs or it's
taking me 15 years to ask for this and
finally I can say hey wait a minute you
know something about this that's amazing
I mean that's that's a gift
yeah and the like threat of love in it
is like very clear to me very very very
clear to me it's
very that I'm cherished that I'm valued
that I'm cared for things that I think I
would have pushed away I would have
pushed you know in some I can take care
of this I'm My Own self-sufficient you
know
like there's so much evidence to like oh
my goodness a community just
spontaneously formed to try to protect
me through an impossible experience it's
not it's not possible to protect me from
this and yet people come here every week
and they you know they do the absolutely
best they can you know they cook and
they drive me around and they try to
come up with fun things to do you know
just just is
somehow you know it's not the
forcefulness of saying yes to it but it
is that like okay you're here I want to
spend time with you we're going to
celebrate basically just this long
celebration C celebrating love and
messiness yeah and how they're kind of
inter yeah you don't get one without the
other one without the
other our Humanity it's like really
celebrating Humanity so beautiful
Michael it's nice to zoom out with you
and you know just sort
of look at the landscape together for a
minute let's do it again love
that love that thank you for listening
to the the art of accomplishment to hear
more
about our shared humanity and all its
messiness you can join our newsletter or
check out our courses at Art of
accomplishment and if you enjoyed what
you heard today share it with a friend
and of course follow us and write us in
your podcast
app and I want to give a huge huge huge
sendoff thank you to Michael Nagel for
being with us here today and taking time
to come see us Michael it's so great
F such a joy to get to spend time with
you yeah yeah
likewise big big love yeah
[Music]